Create Content (#125)
kauri-io/Content: EVM and High Level Languages.md

# The EVM and High-Level Smart Contract Programming Languages

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: I'm not sure how much we need the introduction, this post is an EVM deep-dive, so I think people know what it is.

Author: I gutted this and re-wrote 75% of it, please review.  Thanks!

> Bitcoin has always been the highest volume and value cryptocurrency in digital money. It runs on blockchain technology. Blockchain is a peer to peer, public, encrypted, trust-less ledger. Script is the name of the scripting language that constructs Bitcoin. Script is a mid to lower capability programming language. Public and private key transacting is the model for signing transactions. Besides transacting digital assets, there is no extra utility built into Bitcoin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitcoin has always been the highest volume and value cryptocurrency in digital money, and it runs on blockchain technology. Blockchain is a peer to peer, public, encrypted, trust-less ledger. [Script ](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Script) is the name of the scripting language that constructs Bitcoin. Script is a mid to lower capability programming language. Public and private key transacting is the model for signing transactions. Besides transacting digital assets, there is no extra utility built into Bitcoin. 
```

> Ethereum Blockchain technology offers limitless use case scenarios. A virtual computer deployed on the Ethereum Blockchain creates many possible use cases. Smart contracts are programs written in a high-level programming language. Think of JavaScript syntax with a name of Solidity or Vyper.  These languages build Smart contract code that compiles for use on the Ethereum Blockchain. This computing system revolutionizes privacy, security, and freedom otherwise unrealized in present-day governance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum Blockchain technology offers limitless use cases, thanks to its virtual machine. Smart contracts are programs written in a high-level programming language, including [Solidity ](https://solidity.readthedocs.io/) and [Vyper](https://vyper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installing-vyper.html). These languages build Smart contract code that compiles for use on the Ethereum Blockchain. This computing system revolutionizes privacy, security, and freedom otherwise unrealized in present-day governance.
```

## Ethereum Virtual Machine Feature Overview

High-level is a vague description of a computing platform's capability. Precise performance metrics would go beyond the scope of this article. The Ethereum Blockchain is a powerful and isolated virtual computing environment. Computing features of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) include: 

> 

Reviewer: Could you add a tiny bit of detail on what these mean, or at least maybe link to the wiki or something like that?

* Predefined function libraries 
* Function constructors and destructors
* Function overrides 
* High-level logic
* Looping and recursion 
* Full range of expressions for logical and mathematical arguments
* Control structures
* More than one variable can pass in and out of a function 
* User ability to define custom functions 
* Inheritance
* Polymorphism 
* Sand boxing 
* Two-way interaction with other smart contracts 

> Simple transaction protocol initiates the deployment of very powerful applications on the EVM. The Ethereum protocol is trust-less; secured by peer-to-peer consensus and data encryption. It is very difficult, impossible, to access unauthorized information. The program code is verifiable and impossible to alter. Always available to every user as the same version and build. Pushing updates that users ignore can become a thing of the past.

Reviewer: A lot of this paragraph is a bit basic, and a bit vague. Again, this is a post about an EVM deep dive. A couple of words here and there about what these terms mean is all that's needed.

> Prebuilt functions are built in the EVM.  Among other things these functions create data abstraction between the user and the actual blockchain implementation.  Direct features of the EVM are listed below that have an aggregate functionality of a self contained computer system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prebuilt functions are built in the EVM.  Among other things these functions create data abstractions between the developer and the actual blockchain implementation.  Direct features of the EVM are listed below that have an aggregate functionality of a self contained computer system.
```

> * Simple transaction methods for new smart contract deployment

Reviewer: What does this mean?

> * Smart contract interaction only by address

Reviewer: What does this mean?

> * Arguments and data pass in from the user and pass out to a user or contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Argument passing between contracts
```

* A stack type data structure holds local variables
* It reads function call arguments and return-addresses
* Logic functions can change the order in which instructions execute
* Addressable persistent storage acts as a virtual hard drive 
* Non-persistent storage acts as system memory

> A closer look at the EVM and dApp ecosystem show a complex orchestration of silently running programs and processes. Technology today offers many choices in a programming language presenting obstacles in compatibility. Cross-platform data abstraction requires a complex web of behind the scenes computing. 

Reviewer: This paragraph isn't really helpful. Maybe it's better to reword to explain that contracts interact with each other build from each other.

## Discrete Parts that make the EVM

> As stated before, the EVM is prebuilt with libraries of ready to use functions. Smart contract languages such as Solidity and Vyper are simple, feature-rich languages. Embedded function libraries manipulate data in ways making the EVM quasi-Turing complete. Turing complete system is so named on the basis that it can use a lot of math proving it can solve any algorithm.

Reviewer: Again, this doesn't really add anything.

### EVM Opcodes and Bytecode

<a href="https://imgur.com/J3lKgEy"><img src="https://i.imgur.com/J3lKgEy.png" title="source: imgur.com" /></a>

> Opcodes are a large library of functions preprogrammed into the EVM. A list of all Opcodes available is accessible [here](https://www.ethervm.io/#opcodes). Fewer resources handle these functions because they are small, 4-bit hex identifiers. Every function found in JavaScript or Python exists also in the EVM. Opcodes include functions for data manipulation, I/O, storage, security, and logic. High-level smart contract language compiles into bytecode. This is data passed into the EVM in hex that calls opcode functions and handles user arguments. The image located at the top of the page is a matrix of two digit hex opcodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Opcodes are a large library of functions preprogrammed into the EVM. You can find a list of all Opcodes [in the documentation](https://www.ethervm.io/#opcodes). Fewer resources handle these functions because they are small, 4-bit hex identifiers. Every function found in JavaScript or Python exists also in the EVM. Opcodes include functions for data manipulation, I/O, storage, security, and logic. High-level smart contract language compiles into bytecode. This is data passed into the EVM in hex that calls opcode functions and handles user arguments. The image located at the top of the page is a matrix of two digit hex opcodes. 
```

### Transactions

> Smart Contracts are simple to deploy on the EVM blockchain. Every type of transaction uses the same format to execute the EVM. Two main smart contact transactions call the contract or deploy a new contract. Either of these transactions are capable of calling a large variety of functions. Functions called can be user defined. Data passes in and out of the EVM in either case. This data can pass back to the user or forward on to another contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart Contracts are deployed on the EVM blockchain. Every type of transaction uses the same format to execute the EVM. Two main smart contact transactions call the contract or deploy a new contract. Either of these transactions are capable of calling a large variety of functions. Functions called can be user defined. Data passes in and out of the EVM in either case. This data can pass back to the user or forward on to another contract.
```

Reviewer: The EVM is not the blockchain

<a href="https://imgur.com/bfKk7mY"><img src="https://i.imgur.com/bfKk7mY.png" title="source: imgur.com" /></a>

> The image above shows how a transaction flow can happen in the EVM. Data is passed out of the EVM in what is known as a 'block'. A block is the final result of the arguments, variables, functions, and transactions presented. The data has been manipulated and encrypted. A proof of work puzzle solved by network miners cryptographically proves data integrity. It also cryptographically ties the completed block to adjacent data blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image above shows how a transaction flow happens in the EVM. Data is passed out of the EVM in what is known as a 'block'. A block is the final result of the arguments, variables, functions, and transactions presented. The data has been manipulated and encrypted. A proof of work puzzle solved by network miners cryptographically proves data integrity. It also cryptographically ties the completed block to adjacent data blocks.
```

Reviewer: What do you mean by "manipulated"? What's proof of work? Few details missing here

## Miners - The actual computing power of the EVM

> Key features of the Ethereum Blockchain include decentralization and peer to peer networking. A node can be run by any individual with hardware meeting minimum system requirements. Transactions are broadcast on to the network so that multiple nodes can see them at the same time. A fee is included for the miner that completes the proof of work and finishes a block. This spider web type of proliferation allows the nodes to compare the information they have received and agree that it matches. This comparison is performed among many nodes to create what is called consensus, or agreement that the values now held in block are the true values that represent the current state of the EVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key features of the Ethereum Blockchain include decentralization and peer to peer networking. A node can be run by any individual with hardware meeting minimum system requirements. Transactions are broadcast on to the network so that multiple nodes can see them at the same time. A fee is included for the miner that completes the proof of work and finishes a block. This spider web type of proliferation allows the nodes to compare the information they have received and agree that it matches. This comparison is performed among many nodes to create what is called consensus, or agreement that the values now held in block are the true values that represent the current state of the EVM.
```

## Package Managers, Containers, and Data Abstraction

<a style="height: auto, width: auto"><img src="https://i.imgur.com/x9pHiHQ.png" title="source: imgur.com" /></a>

The above image shows a visual relationship between the high-level languages that are used for dApp programming and the Ethereum Blockchain. Typical dApp implementations may contain multiple programming languages and protocols. The dApp is therefore often created using a container for development and deployment. A container creates an enclosed running environment that holds utilities, libraries, dependencies, and Path variables to ensure proper functionality of the modular dApp components. 

> NPM, Yarn, Django, and React are all package managers that install and abstract the dependencies required in dApp deployment. These various modules handle everything from coding, test flow, and smart contract deployment. This list is not exhaustive of the features and development flows requiring multiple app dependencies installed. During development, the installed application modules are fine tuned by the developer. A package file is created as a manifest for the container application to automatically handle installation and configuration of the many installed dependencies and variables required for these foreign protocols to communicate correctly.

Reviewer: Django and React are not package managers
